README.md, before:

# PBG: Modern Data Engineering

This repository aim to investigate, experiment and understand the modern open source tools and approaches to data engineering with Python.

In this repository we have created a dashboard for Lombardia Italian Healthcare system to understand how the healthcare system is working.

This is just a test and sample experiment

## What we talk

1. how to define the cluster
2. how to create a simple dag
3. tasks and operators
4. dummy operators and file sensors
5. scheduling
6. xcom transfer
7. plugins

## Status
- Create DAGS for data import on different sources
- Create DAGS for data manipulation
- Ingest new data into db
- Create visualization and analysis on streamlit dashboard

**Completed**
- streamlit template
- airflow cluster
- project setup

## Tools

- Python
- Poetry
- Airflow
- Streamlit
- Jupyter (for exploration)
- Folium (for map visualization)
- Pydantic
- Sqlalchemy (pyodbc)

If you want to use SQL Server you have to install **odbc microsoft sql server libraries**.

On linux you can follow [this guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/linux-mac/installing-the-microsoft-odbc-driver-for-sql-server?view=sql-server-ver15)

For us the code in the official website is not working, so we have done this procedure to install the drivers:
```bash 
#on ubuntu 20.04
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y
sudo curl https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | sudo apt-key add -
echo 'deb [arch=amd64,armhf,arm64] https://packages.microsoft.com/ubuntu/20.04/prod focal main' > sudo /etc/apt/sources.list.d/mssql-release.list 
sudo apt-get update
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y msodbcsql18
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y msodbcsql17
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y mssql-tools18
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools18/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools17/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools18/bin"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools17/bin"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.bashrc
sudo apt-get install -y unixodbc-dev
```

## Secrets and settings

If you want to pass some secrets and settings to the airflow cluster to be used inside the DAG you have to create a `.env` file in the root of the repository because launching the `docker-compose.yml`.

All the secrets will be read by airflow and will be used within the cluster by dags.

All the settings that you can place inside the `.env` file are:
- AIRFLOW_UID = the user id code for the user inside the cluster 
- AIRFLOW_GID = the group id code for the user inside the cluster 
- DB_ADDRESS = the azure sql db address
- DB_NAME = the azure sql db name
- DB_NAME_EXTERNAL = the azure sql external db name (final staging db)
- DB_USER = the name of the user of the azure db 
- DB_PASSWORD = the password for the db user
- BLOB_CONN_STR = the connection string for the azure blob storage
- BLOB_CONTAINER = the name of the container in the azure blob storage
- BLOB_NAME = the name of the blob you want to use (csv file)
- API_URL = the url of the api you want to crawl
- LINK_WEB = the link of online resources
- API_DATA_URL = the socrata data url
- API_DATA_SET = the socrata dataset id and name you want to download
- API_DATA_TOKEN = the datatoken to connect to socrata apis
- CHROME_DRIVER_PATH = the place where the selenium chrome driver is inside the cluster

## Repository and code

This is a monorepo, so all the code is included here.  
Inside this repository you can find:
1. The airflow etl code with the dags
2. The streamlit application (inside the app folder)
3. The visual studio code dev container
4. Some notebooks and queries for explorative analysis


## Streamlit ui interface

Since this repository is a monorepo, inside the `app` folder you can find the multipage application streamlit containing the dashboards.

To use this application you need to create inside the .streamlit folder the `secrets.toml` file with these keys
- server = `address of db`
- database = `name of db`
- username = `username of db`
- password = `password of db`

The credentials are for sql server, in particular for azure sql server that we used for this tutorial.

## Useful commands

```bash
# launch the airflow infrastructure
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml up --build -d

# launch the etl container that used airflow with the dags

# launch the streamlit application

# stop or remove all the docker containers for a specific dockerfile configuration
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml stop  #if you want to stop them
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml rm #if you want to remove them

# visualize the informations of docker container running and not
docker ps -a

# visualize the logs for a docker container
docker logs -t <container name>

# enter inside a docker container (for bin/bash)
docker exec -it <container name> /bin/bash

# inspect a container and get all the informations
docker inspect <container name>

# stop containers and delete volumes
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml down --volumes --rmi all

# launch all the project with a make file

```

If you want to forward the port from the server to your machine (because everything here is not exposed on internet on PBG server) you can do:
```bash
ssh -L [LOCAL_IP:]LOCAL_PORT:DESTINATION:DESTINATION_PORT [USER@]SSH_SERVER

#example (pbg server is defined into ssh config file)
ssh -LN 8042:localhost:8080 pbg

```
You can add your machine configuration inside the ssh config file for your user: `~/.ssh/config`


## Considerations,  errors and problems

Collection of comments, info and problems that we found during the development and how to fix them

**pyodbc**

To use **pyodbc** on linux you have to install the following dependencies:
`sudo apt install unixodbc-dev`

We suggest also on linux and docker to install those packages:
```
sudo apt install vim libpq-dev gcc curl openssh-client git unixodbc-dev libxml2-dev libxslt1-dev zlib1g-dev g++
```

**psycopg library**

To use the system with psycopg2 for the postgres database connection it's important to install in your system (linux-based) the requirements: `sudo apt-get install libpq-dev`

To launch the project from terminal if you are on the project root you have to do: `PYTHONPATH="./" python ./test/<name of the script>.py`

Be carefull not to install virtualenv via `apt` on linux, but use virtualenv by `pip`.

## Useful Documentation
- [PythonBiellaGroup website for poetry and other configurations](https://pythonbiellagroup.it)
- [Airflow official documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/overview.html)
- [Airflow docker getting started](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/start/docker.html)
- [Airflow official docker-compose version](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/docker-compose.yaml)
- [Airflow production images and docker-compose](https://github.com/apache/airflow/issues/8605)
- [Airflow custom docker image](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/docker-stack/build.html)
- [Running airflow in docker](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.1.3/start/docker.html)
- [Airflow Production Deployment](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/1.10.14/production-deployment.html)
- [Airflow with Redis and Celery](https://medium.com/codex/how-to-scale-out-apache-airflow-2-0-with-redis-and-celery-3e668e003b5c)
- [Pydantic settings management](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/settings/)
- [Microsoft ODBC driver installation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/linux-mac/installing-the-microsoft-odbc-driver-for-sql-server?view=sql-server-ver15)
- [Airflow sensors](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-sensors/)
- [Airflow task groups](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-taskgroups-all-you-need-to-know/)
- [Airflow timetable](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-timetable-schedule-your-dags-like-never-before/)
- [Airflow trigger rules](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-trigger-rules-all-you-need-to-know/)
- [Airflow variables](https://marclamberti.com/blog/variables-with-apache-airflow/)

If you want to **monitor and control** the ETL you have to connect to the web interface.
- If you run this on a server don't forget to forward the port via ssh (see Useful commands section behind)
- Monitor executions of DAGs, available at: http://**ip**:8080/
- Monitor celery execution: http://**ip**:5555

Default credentials for Airflow web interface:
- user: Airflow
- password: airflow

Commit message:

added slide, better documentation, new functionalities and bug fixing

README.md, after:

# PBG: Modern Data Engineering

This repository aim to investigate, experiment and understand the modern open source tools and approaches to data engineering with Python.

In this repository we have created a dashboard for Lombardia Italian Healthcare system to understand how the healthcare system is working.

This is just a test and sample experiment

## What we talk

1. how to define the cluster
2. how to create a simple dag
3. tasks and operators
4. dummy operators and file sensors
5. scheduling
6. xcom transfer
7. plugins

## Status
- Create DAGS for data import on different sources
- Create DAGS for data manipulation
- Ingest new data into db
- Create visualization and analysis on streamlit dashboard

**Completed**
- streamlit template
- airflow cluster
- project setup

## Tools

- Python
- Poetry
- Airflow
- Streamlit
- Jupyter (for exploration)
- Folium (for map visualization)
- Pydantic
- Sqlalchemy (pyodbc)

If you want to use SQL Server you have to install **odbc microsoft sql server libraries**.

On linux you can follow [this guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/linux-mac/installing-the-microsoft-odbc-driver-for-sql-server?view=sql-server-ver15)

For us the code in the official website is not working, so we have done this procedure to install the drivers:
```bash 
#on ubuntu 20.04
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y
sudo curl https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | sudo apt-key add -
echo 'deb [arch=amd64,armhf,arm64] https://packages.microsoft.com/ubuntu/20.04/prod focal main' > sudo /etc/apt/sources.list.d/mssql-release.list 
sudo apt-get update
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y msodbcsql18
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y msodbcsql17
sudo ACCEPT_EULA=Y apt-get install -y mssql-tools18
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools18/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools17/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools18/bin"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools17/bin"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.bashrc
sudo apt-get install -y unixodbc-dev
```

## Secrets and settings

If you want to pass some secrets and settings to the airflow cluster to be used inside the DAG you have to create a `.env` file in the root of the repository because launching the `docker-compose.yml`.

All the secrets will be read by airflow and will be used within the cluster by dags.

All the settings that you can place inside the `.env` file are:
- AIRFLOW_UID = the user id code for the user inside the cluster 
- AIRFLOW_GID = the group id code for the user inside the cluster 
- DB_ADDRESS = the azure sql db address
- DB_NAME = the azure sql db name
- DB_NAME_EXTERNAL = the azure sql external db name (final staging db)
- DB_USER = the name of the user of the azure db 
- DB_PASSWORD = the password for the db user
- BLOB_CONN_STR = the connection string for the azure blob storage
- BLOB_CONTAINER = the name of the container in the azure blob storage
- BLOB_NAME = the name of the blob you want to use (csv file)
- API_URL = the url of the api you want to crawl
- LINK_WEB = the link of online resources
- API_DATA_URL = the socrata data url
- API_DATA_SET = the socrata dataset id and name you want to download
- API_DATA_TOKEN = the datatoken to connect to socrata apis
- CHROME_DRIVER_PATH = the place where the selenium chrome driver is inside the cluster

## Repository and code

This is a monorepo, so all the code is included here.  
Inside this repository you can find:
1. The airflow etl code with the dags
2. The streamlit application (inside the app folder)
3. The visual studio code dev container
4. Some notebooks and queries for explorative analysis


## Streamlit ui interface

Since this repository is a monorepo, inside the `app` folder you can find the multipage application streamlit containing the dashboards.

To use this application you need to create inside the .streamlit folder the `secrets.toml` file with these keys
- server = `address of db`
- database = `name of db`
- username = `username of db`
- password = `password of db`

The credentials are for sql server, in particular for azure sql server that we used for this tutorial.

## Useful commands

```bash
# launch the airflow infrastructure
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml up --build -d

# launch the etl container that used airflow with the dags

# launch the streamlit application

# stop or remove all the docker containers for a specific dockerfile configuration
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml stop  #if you want to stop them
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml rm #if you want to remove them

# visualize the informations of docker container running and not
docker ps -a

# visualize the logs for a docker container
docker logs -t <container name>

# enter inside a docker container (for bin/bash)
docker exec -it <container name> /bin/bash

# inspect a container and get all the informations
docker inspect <container name>

# stop containers and delete volumes
docker-compose -f docker-compose.airflow.yml down --volumes --rmi all

# launch all the project with a make file

```

If you want to forward the port from the server to your machine (because everything here is not exposed on internet on PBG server) you can do:
```bash
ssh -L [LOCAL_IP:]LOCAL_PORT:DESTINATION:DESTINATION_PORT [USER@]SSH_SERVER

#example (pbg server is defined into ssh config file)
ssh -LN 8042:localhost:8080 pbg

```
You can add your machine configuration inside the ssh config file for your user: `~/.ssh/config`


## Considerations,  errors and problems

Collection of comments, info and problems that we found during the development and how to fix them

#### Airflow manual configuration

If you want to use `FileSensor` capabilities, you have to manual create the connection going to the web interface to: Admin  > Connections and create a new connection to read the files in the machine.

If you want to know more about FileSensor, please refer to this [guide](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-sensors/)

You can also specify connections programmatically, please referer to the [official documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/connection.html) if you want to know more.



#### pyodbc

To use **pyodbc** on linux you have to install the following dependencies:
`sudo apt install unixodbc-dev`

We suggest also on linux and docker to install those packages:
```
sudo apt install vim libpq-dev gcc curl openssh-client git unixodbc-dev libxml2-dev libxslt1-dev zlib1g-dev g++
```

#### psycopg library

To use the system with psycopg2 for the postgres database connection it's important to install in your system (linux-based) the requirements: `sudo apt-get install libpq-dev`

To launch the project from terminal if you are on the project root you have to do: `PYTHONPATH="./" python ./test/<name of the script>.py`

Be carefull not to install virtualenv via `apt` on linux, but use virtualenv by `pip`.

## Useful Documentation
- [PythonBiellaGroup website for poetry and other configurations](https://pythonbiellagroup.it)
- [Airflow official documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/overview.html)
- [Airflow docker getting started](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/start/docker.html)
- [Airflow official docker-compose version](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/docker-compose.yaml)
- [Airflow production images and docker-compose](https://github.com/apache/airflow/issues/8605)
- [Airflow custom docker image](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/docker-stack/build.html)
- [Running airflow in docker](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.1.3/start/docker.html)
- [Airflow Production Deployment](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/1.10.14/production-deployment.html)
- [Airflow with Redis and Celery](https://medium.com/codex/how-to-scale-out-apache-airflow-2-0-with-redis-and-celery-3e668e003b5c)
- [Pydantic settings management](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/settings/)
- [Microsoft ODBC driver installation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/linux-mac/installing-the-microsoft-odbc-driver-for-sql-server?view=sql-server-ver15)
- [Airflow sensors](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-sensors/)
- [Airflow task groups](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-taskgroups-all-you-need-to-know/)
- [Airflow timetable](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-timetable-schedule-your-dags-like-never-before/)
- [Airflow trigger rules](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-trigger-rules-all-you-need-to-know/)
- [Airflow variables](https://marclamberti.com/blog/variables-with-apache-airflow/)
- [Airflow xcom guide](https://marclamberti.com/blog/airflow-xcom/)
- [Airflow to execute SQL](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-tutorial/)
- [Airflow plugins](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/using-airflow-plugins/)

If you want to **monitor and control** the ETL you have to connect to the web interface.
- If you run this on a server don't forget to forward the port via ssh (see Useful commands section behind)
- Monitor executions of DAGs, available at: http://**ip**:8080/
- Monitor celery execution: http://**ip**:5555

Default credentials for Airflow web interface:
- user: Airflow
- password: airflow
